# What drives global warming?

Climate forcings are different factors that affect the Earth's climate. These "forcings" drive or "force" the climate system to change. There are natural forcings and man-made forcings. Some natural forcings include volcanic eruptions, changes in the energy output of the sun, and changes in the Earth's orbit. But none of these factors significantly contributed to the global temperature increase of 1.9 degrees Fahrenheit observed since 1880. [1] Only man-made forcings, in particular greenhouse gas emissions, can possibly explain the temperature increase observed in our recent history.

The activity on the right compares the observed global temperature from 1880 to 2005 with the three major natural forcings and one man-made forcing using data generated by NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS). [2] Each forcing's line shows to what extent it drove the Earth's climate to be warmer or cooler compared to the baseline 1880-1910 average.

For each forcing, color the area above the baseline red, representing when the forcing drove the climate warmer. Color the area below the baseline blue, representing when the forcing drove the climate cooler.

As you will see, the influence of orbital changes and solar temperature variation on the Earth's temperature over 125 years has been negligible.  Stratospheric aerosols from volcanic eruptions can actually have a strong, negative cooling influence, but it is very short term. Greenhouse gases are shown to have the greatest sustained positive forcing on the Earth's climate system.

## Sources

[1] Global Surface Temperature Anomalies. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National Centers for Environmental Information.
[2] ModelE2 Climate Simulations. National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS).
